---
author: Vamshi Suram
comments: true
date: 2010-03-04 21:40:39+00:00
layout: post
slug: test post
title: 'test post - Ref: Dilawar'
wordpress_id: 7
categories:
- Test
---

How to use natural numbers? That is very easy. We've all learned how to use
natural numbers in school. But it is  hard to answer; "How to define natural
numbers?". And harder would be; "How to define the actions we do on natural
numbers such as multiplication or addition?" Terrence Tao has discussed these
issues beautifully in his book and I recommend that one should get this book and
read Chapter 2 and 3 [1].

Here we discuss one of the methods to define natural numbers.

## [Defining Natural Numbers : Peano Axioms](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peano_axioms)

These axioms are the standard way to define natural numbers (Can you build your
own set of axioms? This will be a nice exercise. Please let me know.). Let's
first solve our first problem. To use natural numbers we have to write them
down. How to write down the natural numbers? We use standard figures of 0, 1, 2,
3, etc. to represent them, but we would not take this for granted. But to start,
we need some raw material. This raw material is the minimum required to build
our structure called natural numbers. For example, if we wish to build the wall,
we need bricks. If we are bold enough, we can start from clay and make the
bricks by ourselves. Well, I'd like to have superpowers so that I can make
silica by myself. All needed were fundamental particles. One can again ask
whether I can start from more fundamental. This is where we are restricted by
our imagination. Anyway, to build our structure of natural numbers, we start
with two things. Lets assume that someone has given them to us, one is the
number 0 (zero) and one is increment operator ++ and we collect all the natural
number in a set (a mathematical basket) of Natural numbers represented by $$\mathbb{N})$$.


**Operator ++** : If we apply this operator to any of the natural number, we get
the **NEXT** natural number. So **0++** is our next natural number ('1' is saner
way to write this number). Next in line will be $$(0++)++$$ (or 2) and
$$((0++)++)++$$ (3) and so on. Now we bring in these axioms known as Peano
Axioms.

### Axiom 1. _0 is a natural number._

No, you can not ask any question, you mortal earthling!

### Axiom 2. _if n is a natural number then n++ is a natural number._

We start from 0 and apply this axiom once. We get 0++ aka 1 in this big empty
world. Apply this axiom again and we get (0++)++ aka 2. Now if someone ask you
to prove that 5 is a natural number, then invoke axiom 1 and apply axiom 2 five
times and do not forget to laugh at his face. [wink, wink]. These two axioms
seems to be enough to build natural numbers. But world is not filled with
ordinary people only : there are mathematicians too and these mathematicians do
not like each other. Consider two mathematicians, Superman and Lax Luthor.
Superman gave these two axioms and thought that he saved the day. But next day
Lax Luthor came up with his evil argument. He argues (fortunately anti-Superman
Lax Luthor only argues) that as soon as he goes up to some number say 7, next
time Supey invokes axiom 2, He'll wrap back to 0, i.e. 7++ = 0. What you gonna
do about it pretty face? These two axioms still holds but out natural number set
$$\mathbb{N}$$ will contain numbers from this series 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 1 2 3
4 5 6 7 0 1 2 ....

### Axiom 3 : _0 is not the successor of any natural number, i.e. there is no
number n such that n++ = 0._

Lax now argues, "Ok, fine! 7++ is not equal to 0. Let say 7++ is now equal to 1
or 2 or 3 etc. This will not contradict with any of Superman's axioms. If 7++ =
2 then my system is 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 2 3 4 5 6 7 2 3 4 5 6 ....

### Axiom 4: _Different natural numbers have different successors; i.e., if n, m
are two different natural numbers than n++ and m++ are also different natural
numbers. EQUIVALENTLY if m++ = n++ then we must have m = n._

Now what Lax! All natural numbers are now distinct. 7++ can not be equal to 2
because there is another number 1 such that 1++ = 2. According to this axiom,
7++ and 1++ must be different. Should Superman think  that he is done?  Wait!
Lax Luthor is not considered one of the top  ranked super villain for nothing.
He now argues that 0.5, 1.5, 2.5 etc are also natural numbers. He is introducing
'_rogue elements'.  _Now it is Superman primary duty to keep rogue elements away
from Mathematics. Sure, one can argue that one can never get 0.5, 1.5 etc if he
starts building natural numbers from 0 using these axioms.  But how Superman
will prove this. How does he know when 0.5 will never apears in $latex
\mathbb{N}$. Superman can keep constructing natural number till the end of time
and Lax will keep saying, 'You have not exhaused all possibilities. Keep it
coming!".

How superman will make this _Lakshman Rekha _to keep these rogue elements out of
$$\mathbb{N}$$. Can Superman get away from it by stating, "You can never get
0.5 in Natual numbers becasue 0.5 is between 0 and 1 and you can produce any
number between 0 and 1." But it will be very difficult for Mathematical League
(not the creepy Justice League. to quantify what Superman means by "0.5 is
between 0 and 1". How can he say that 0.5 lies between 0 and 1? Is there any
proof?

### Axiom 5 : _Principle of Mathematical Induction_

> Let P(n) be any property pertaining to natural number n. Suppose that P(0) is
> true, ans suppose that when P(n) is true, P(n++) is also true. Then P(n) is
> true.

What does Superman mean by 'property' is hard to say at this point. For
example P(n) might be "n is prime"; "n is odd"; "n solve a given
equation".

Now P(n) is such that p(0) is true; and whenever P(n) is true, P(n++) is
also true.  The since P(0) is true P(0++) aka P(1) is true. Since P(1) is
true so is P(1++) i.e. P(2) is true and so one. If this fail with P(0.5),
then 0.5 is not an natural number. We can use a simple proof given in [2]
to keep the rogue elements 0.5, 1.5 etc out of $$\mathbb{N}$$.

__Proof__ : We will be needing integers without defining them. We
borrow the definition of integers. Lets say P(n) = n "is not a half
integer" i.e. an integer plus 0.5. Then P(0) is true. And if P(n) is true,
then P(n++) is true. Thus this axiom assert that P(n) is true for all
natural numbers n, i.e. no natural number can be half integer; and P(0.5)
fails to pass this test.[2]

> Since this axiom refers not just to variable but also to PROPERTIES, it
> should technically be called 'axiom schema' rather than an axiom - it is
> a template for producing an infinite number of axioms, rather than being
> a simple axiom in its own right. [Analysis I, Terence Tao. pp 20].

NOTES:

+ It is hard to believe that there could be some people who does not
  have some idea of natural numbers. People use different name/figures to
  speak/write natural numbers. It is believed that most of the animals
  have some idea or sense of natural numbers. A bird can be seen in stress
  if one of her eggs is stolen i.e. she knows how to count. Language helps
  us to represent these numbers. However, there is a [study publiashed in
  Science](http://www.nature.com/news/2004/040816/full/news040816-10.html)
  which contradict this view. Apparently their counting system consists of
  three quantity, one, few and many. Go ahead, read this story published
  in [Nature](http://www.nature.com/news/2004/040816/full/news040816-10.html)

### READINGS:

*  [**Analysis I**](http://terrytao.wordpress.com/books/analysis-i/), by
  [_Terrence Tao._](http://terrytao.wordpress.com/)
